In this chapter we are going to have
a look at how to build
and deploy native Quarkus applications.
We are going to start with how
native compilation works?
What are the requirements
and limitations for it?
And then check that out
live in a guided exercise.
Then we are going to have a
look at how to containerize
natively built applications and have
an exercise about that as well.
Java applications traditionally
running a Java virtual machine.
While there has been a native
compilation option ages ago,
it was way too complicated,
required writing, or at least
modifying C and C ++ code
and it was very low level operation with
the resulting binaries being quite
complex and difficult to produce.
So pretty much most of the efforts
over the coming years went into
making the just-in-time compiler and
the virtual machine itself
as efficient as possible.
And actually, thanks to endless
efforts of great experts in the area
of adaptive compilation and
memory management and all the
other techniques involved in that,
we have got a very,
very efficient Java virtual
machine these days.
Even if you look just at the
standard hotspot virtual machine
but also all the alternative implementations
produced by various vendors are
extremely efficient and really fast.
It does help that
the modern CPUs are becoming
faster and faster as well.
So for the most part,
in many use cases,
running an application in
a Java virtual machine is not
really that much of a problem.
However, there are use cases
where you absolutely cannot
afford 1 second startup time
and the memory footprint.
Moreover, that the loading of
a Java virtual machine and
all its additional functions represents
or impresses on the system.
So just in time compilation also
becomes tricky in certain use cases.
We just simply do not want
the virtual machine to be
translating Java byte code into
machine code just before
the CPU needs it to execute.
We want to do something more
permanent and more preemptive.
And that is called native compilation.
And one of the most popular
currently
native compilation toolkits
for Java is called GraalVM.
GraalVM is actually both, it's
a Java virtual machine and
a software development kit.
It's been developed and is owned by
Oracle and has a vast set of tools.
It's actually a polyglot
execution environment,
among other things, which supports
many, many different languages.
But the function that
is most important for
Quarkus is its Native Image support,
which is actually a process
of compiling bytecode,
or compiling source code into bytecode,
and then that Java bytecode
into machine code
ahead of time,
which is ahead of time
compilation is basically
just a different term for producing
a native executable, right?
So what happens is that GraalVM
performs extensive static code
analysis in order to try and
identify any possible
execution path in our program.
And when it does identify
any possible execution path,
it then takes the code that could
get activated during the
execution of a program,
it just simply throws away anything else.
It basically removes code that it
considers to be unreachable
in, under any circumstances
and then compiles what's
left into native code.
That makes it possible to run
the application independently
of the Java virtual machine.
And the result is a tiny
executable compared to what it
would take if we had
to load the entire JVM
with extremely fast response
times and startup time.
So of course, Quarkus then adds to
the picture a little bit,
because with GraalVM,
it's not all so simple.
You would normally have
to provide GraalVM with
a configuration file telling it
where reflection is being used,
what are the other special cases
that it needs to consider and so on.
A Quarkus does that for you.
Quarkus is, as we initially mentioned,
build with the goal of
being able to strip down
the Java classes to the bare
minimum to begin with anyway.
And it does take some,
it does cut some corners in
in trying to achieve that.
That's why we had some limitations,
so far, such as for example,
trying to have or striving to have field access
or restrictions as either
package, private or public.
Because it just makes it easier to have
insight into class and not have to use
reflection to get acquainted
with the classes data model.
Now, doing that with Java to begin
with makes it possible for Quarkus to
actually provide instructions to GraalVM
instead of us having to
write the configuration files.
And then the next step,
so Graal and Quarkus work
very well together.
But the entire GraalVM ecosystem
is actually not necessary.
Quarkus only needs the Native Image
part of the functionality. It does
not need the Truffle language,
the different runtimes a
GraalVM comes with and so on
so. Actually, Red Hat and
the GraalVM community have
managed to produce the
stripped down open source and
Red Hat supported distribution
of GraalVM called Mandrel.
And Mandrel just simply, it uses
OpenJDK instead of GraalVM's JDK.
And it simply uses the Native
Image functionality of
GraalVM to be able to perform
native ahead of time compilation.
Now, as we said,
there are some severe caveat when
developing native applications.
First of all, there is the
ability to write native tests.
Of course, you want to test code as it's
being compiled into native binaries.
But the problem is that no
injection works in native binaries.
You cannot use the code
injection facility that
java allows you to do
with native applications,
with natively compiled applications.
Because it's not running in a JVM,
so there are no JVM facilities.
You can only test an exercise, a
native application from without.
So just as if you would, if you were a client.
Second thing is we need to
register all classes that are used
in the code during the
static code analysis.
Now, if a class, a method or a field can be
used by reflection and is
actually used by reflection only,
it will not become a part of the code
tree because reflection is indirect
access to contents of objects and
classes, of course structure of classes.
And it is as such,
invisible to static code analysis.
You will have to exercise
code dynamically,
which is incredibly expensive if
you want to do it thoroughly.
So a common use case,
why am I mentioning this
is a common use case for
a reflection is serializing data.
Serialization and deserialization
frameworks do not know
ahead of time what kind of objects
they are going to be dealing with.
So they have to discover the
structure before they serialize them
and they can only do this with
an unknown object by reflection.
So JsonB is one such example
where reflection is used heavily.
Now, for this purpose,
there is a solution.
If you look at the following code sample,
there is an example code,
there is an ExampleResource object which
uses an inner class called Data, right?
That's not in and of itself a problem.
It has a list and the list of
instances of objects of type
ExampleResource.Data.
As all fine,
in the constructor, we initialize
the list with 2 items
and then the GET endpoint method returns
a list of items in the internal list.
And for that it uses
responses builder method.
And the response actually, because
it's not a type-safe method,
it uses reflection to
discover the structure
of this data that we are passing
to the ok method right?
Now,
it's all fine,
if we are running this application in a
Java virtual machine. Reflection works,
response class can actually introspect
the object and serialize
it properly to JSON,
which is actually stated here
at the top of the class, right?
It produces JSON.
The moment we do ahead
of time compilation,
produce native code for this program,
Response cannot do reflection anymore.
So during static code analysis,
this method would have actually not
triggered the registration of the
data class as something that we need.
And therefore, if we were
running this class natively,
the result of this response
would be an empty list.
Luckily, there is an annotation
which helps Quarkus
register additional classes with the
Graal or with Mandrel Native Image,
such that they still get
added to the code list.
And if you annotate the inner class
with the register for
reflection annotation,
it will actually end up in the
list of classes included in
the native code and we will
be able to work. Ofcourse,
the same problem happens
when you're using
private access modifiers for
fields and then use injection.
Injecting into a private field
again requires reflection,
so Quarkus DI actually needs it if
you're marking your fields as private.
Again, another,
so there are 2 solutions
to this problem.
You either do not use
private access modifiers and keep
them package-private or even public,
or register the member
class for reflection,
which means that it will be
included in the code path.
But wildly registering
things for reflection
just produces more bloat than you
actually need in the final image.
Because, well then we could
just simply register everything
for reflection and end up with
the 20-megabyte executable
instead of having something
on the order of a 100,
200 kilobytes. Using package-
private modifiers instead of private, class
private is a recommendation
for injection points,
constructors, initializers,
observer methods,
producer methods and fields,
disposers and interceptors. In short,
any common CDI service is
best made package-private,
if not just protected.
Third-party libraries are
obviously going to be
a big problem because you
cannot modify their code.
So you cannot explicitly register certain
classes and methods for reflection.
So there is the ability to use reflection-
config.json file in your /src/main/resources/
directory in the project.
And it is just essentially a list of
all the classes that you want to
register for reflection that are
external to the application.
The structure of the dictionaries
in that list is simply the name,
which is the fully,
qualified name of the
class you want to register.
And then a list of choices of
which elements of the class
you want to register.
So you want constructors
that are declared or
just the public ones or both the same
for methods and the same for fields.
That is one part,
so writing the reflection-config.json
file is one part.
The other part is that
you then need to provide
the reflection file as a parameter for
ReflectionConfigurationFiles on
the build argument on
the build command line.
And you can do that by using quarkus.
native.additional-build-args,
providing a -H colon option,
setting the attribute of
ReflectionConfigurationFiles
and pointing to that file.
There are many use cases
for native applications.
Of course, we went
through some of them,
Serverless architectures are one applications
that have an extremely high density
and of course have memory bound workloads.
Deployments that are deployed
to orchestration platforms,
where it's kind of important
to preserve resources,
both memory and CPU,
and of course, because of dynamic scaling,
it's also good to have fast startup times
and not least, command line applications.
If you have ever written a script
that invokes a Java tool in the loop,
you know how much time is lost,
just simply waiting for that tool to
load over and over and
over and over again,
performing repetitive actions
hundreds of times, for example.
In that case, your script would
immensely benefit from having
a native version of that tool.
Of course, as we said, in addition to
the restrictions that are
presented by the ahead of time,
static code analysis and
compilation, which is,
we need to be able to identify the
entire code execution tree and add
all the member classes
and methods that
are involved to the code
that we've compiled.
There is no Just In Time compilation,
which means there are no
optimization during runtime.
So we're back to the good old days
of compile-time optimization.
So we need to actually, for example,
when building a native application,
we need to know in advance what is the
important outcome of this application.
Do we want to achieve
faster execution
over at the price of a
slightly larger executable,
more memory consumption,
slightly slower load time.
So then we can tell the compiler to
perform certain types of optimization,
such as unrolling loops,
instead of creating loops which might
cost a little bit more
in terms of CPU time.
So these, while they do
happen automatically in
Just In Time compilers and
in Java virtual machines,
they cannot happen in native code.
Code limitations, we've
already talked about,
so private access modifiers,
reflection, and so on.
Build time is probably
the biggest hit here.
It takes, I'm not going to say forever,
but it takes extremely long for
native application to build.
If it takes, for example,
let's say 25 seconds to
build a Java application from
source code to Java bytecode,
native compilation will completely depend
on the complexity of the
code that you're building,
not the amount of it.
And it might take anywhere up to 10
minutes to produce native executable.
Of course, the benefits must outweigh
this amount of time that they
spend during compilation.
The compilation process
is quite CPU intensive.
It is quite memory intensive too.
So native compilation
may be better suited for
production use rather than
obviously recompiling in native
mode during development time,
75 times a day.
That is just a waste of time.
Perhaps also one relatively severe hit
is that profiling code, debugging code,
You cannot do this with the Java tools.
Just like with any other
native executable,
you have to plan ahead of time to create
a native executable that includes
debugging symbols so
that you can use GDB or
other native debugging tools for
tracing through the applications.
Otherwise, you would just have code
addresses and assembly code to deal with.
So, especially with automated
compilation framework such as Native Image
actually is, the native code
that is generated is very,
very difficult to understand.
So debugging is going to
be a bit of an issue.
Profiling even more so because
obviously the code that you're
profiling has no direct
source counterpart.
So you will get some symbols that may
not actually tie into the application
that you've initially written.
And it's going to be very difficult to
correlate the profile information from
the native application back into
your original source code and
perform any optimization.
So these are quite big challenges
in native applications.
But as they said benefits sometimes
immensely outweigh
these disadvantages.
So how do you build a native
application? It's really easy.
You simply tell Maven to
use the native profile.
This of course, does
depend on Mandrel being
installed on the machine
that you're performing,
the compilation, the build on.
If installing Mandrel as an external tool,
you have to set
GraalVM home environment variable and
point it to where Mandrel is installed.
You also have to download
the native image,
the native image addon using GU,
which is GraalVM packaging
command, package management command.
There are a couple of steps,
but most importantly,
you must take extreme care
that the Java virtual
machine that you're using and
Mandrel are a compatible version.
Generally, when you're downloading Mandrel,
you will have had notes in the release
notes telling you which particular
OpenJDK it is compatible with.
And make triple sure that
the Mandrel version does match the
OpenJDK version that you're using.
Otherwise, you will get
weird errors out of
the blue and a lot of erratic behavior.
Now, probably the easiest way to use
native compilation with Mandrel is
to use it's containerized image.
You can actually tell Quarkus
to use a Mandrel container
by setting the quarkus.native.container-build parameter to true.
It can either be set on the command
line or in application properties.
And if you want to use a
custom Mandrel image,
we can also set the quarkus.native.builder-image parameter to
the URL where that image can be found.
Of course, you need a container
runtime to be able to do this.
So depending on which one you're using,
you will commonly use
or you commonly set quarkus.
native.container-runtime to
either podman or docker, if
that's what you're using.
An example build command
is displayed in the book.
So here we are triggering
on the containerized
native build using podman to create
that container using registry.access.
redhat.com/quarkus/mandrel-20,
that is version 20 based
on rhel8 as base image.
The Pnative makes this a native build.
This process generates a number of files
and then places them into the target
subdirectory within your project.
So that is no different
from any other build.
If you're looking for the
actual results of the build,
you will see it inside
the target directory.
You're going to be called
whatever your artifact ID is,
minus version, minus
RUNNER in all capitals.
If you want to containerize
the native application,
that's something that we're going to look
at more closely in the next section.
You can use Dquarkus.container-image.build,
just like if you were containerizing
a normal Quarkus application,
just that, you simply add
the Pnative profile switch
and that's that. Alternative to that,
is to use the one of the Docker files.
If you use the Quarkus create,
quarkus maven plugins create
goal to initialize the project,
in src/main, you will have a
subdirectory called Docker.
And inside it, there's going
to be a couple of files
among which there's also
a Dockerfile.native
and that one would do the same thing as
this above command would
have done with Maven.
You'd invoke it using podman build,
pointing it to src/main/docker/
Dockerfile.native and tagging
the image with whatever
name you want to give it.
Let's have a look at how to build
native applications with
Quarkus in the next exercise.